add TypeScript ESLint (#1)
sourcegraph/deep-dives: TypeScript_ESLint.snb.md

> # How TypeScript ESLint Works, a source-level introduction

Author: The advertising banner at the top of the page is annoying: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1646931/168620761-b0227188-b67d-4b44-908d-3a0f93adbccf.png)

Author: The filename & git info for code snippets (pic 2) takes up a lot of vertical space -- two lines. Can the second line be moved to the right (or just.. removed?)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1646931/168620904-52db2029-e51d-4abe-8a00-8adcfb53e25b.png)

> TypeScript ESLint is the de facto standard for linting in TypeScript. It's used by hundreds of thousands of projects and ensures code quality, security, and best practices across the TypeScript world. If you're deploying TypeScript into production, chances are you're using this in your toolchain.

Author: ```suggestion
TypeScript ESLint is the de facto tool for linting in TypeScript. It's used by hundreds of thousands of projects and ensures code quality, security, and best practices across the TypeScript world. If you're deploying TypeScript into production, chances are you're using this in your toolchain.
```

In this post, we provide a hands-on, technical introduction to how this essential static analysis tool works by tracing through its key code paths. We'll cover the following:

* How linting rules are defined
* The use of dueling ASTs
* A neat co-recursive switch pattern for AST traversal

Read on!

## Overview

> TypeScript ESLint is implemented as an ESLint plugin. It has a few main modules, the most important of which are:

Author: ```suggestion
TypeScript ESLint is implemented as a collection of packages that build on ESLint. It has a few main modules, the most important of which are:
```

* `eslint-plugin`, which defines the ESLint plugin and the linting rules.
* `parser` and `typescript-estree`, which are responsible for parsing TypeScript source code into an ESLint-compatible form, mapping from TypeScript ASTs to ESLint's AST representation (ESTree) and providing an API to query the AST from the rules.

> ## How rules work

Author: From @JoshuaKGoldberg

> - I don't think we want to be in the business of explaining core ESLint rules. I'd personally replace most of this whole section with a link to the ESLint docs.
> - Instead: it should probably show the `util.createRule` function and describe how it maps to the ESLint equivalent. Some partial overlap with contents.
> - `no-for-in-array` would be an excellent canonical introduction for docs, except it includes usage of the type checker. Since not all readers would understand that thing, I'd rather it get introduced in a later section.
> - I'd suggest moving the ASTs discussion into its own section

Author: > I don't think we want to be in the business of explaining core ESLint rules. I'd personally replace most of this whole section with a link to the ESLint docs.

@JoshuaKGoldberg I think it might be good to write up two versions of this doc, one to release as a blog post / newsletter and another to commit to the TSESLint docs. For example, the blog post audience probably doesn't want to click through to another page to learn about ESLint rules, whereas doc readers would.

I can open up a PR directly on the TSESLint repository for the documentation version of this post if you like

> Instead: it should probably show the util.createRule function and describe how it maps to the ESLint equivalent. Some partial overlap with contents.

I poked around the ESLint code, but couldn't find an analog to `util.createRule`. I do see how [ESLint rules like this one](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/eslint/eslint@main/-/blob/lib/rules/arrow-spacing.js?L56) roughly mirror their counterparts in TSESLint, but they don't seem to explicitly invoke a `createRule` function, instead just declaring the rule as the default module export. Is that what you wanted to call out here?

> no-for-in-array would be an excellent canonical introduction for docs, except it includes usage of the type checker. Since not all readers would understand that thing, I'd rather it get introduced in a later section.

Is there another rule that would be a better introduction that you can point me to? Another thing we could do here is ignore the type checker and ASTs for now, just handwave that as magic we'll dive into in the next section. WDYT?

> I'd suggest moving the ASTs discussion into its own section

Will do.

Reviewer: > two versions of this doc

Strong +1, if you don't mind doing the extra work 😄. My feedback on direction makes a lot less sense in the blog post / newsletter compared to the TSESLint docs!

> PR directly on the TSESLint repository

That would be wonderful, yes please! 

> `util.createRule` ... Is that what you wanted to call out here?

Hmm, I think my goal here is twofold:

* Make sure folks know that we're "just" defining ESLint rules. 
   * They just _happen_ to use APIs from our packages and/or ESQuery queries aligned with the TSESTree node shapes. We're just a layer on ESLint, not a whole reimagining.
* We strongly recommend consumers use `ESLintUtils.RuleCreator` / `ESLintUtils.RuleCreator.withoutDocs` to create a rule, as it plays nicely with TypeScript types

I'll leave a few inline suggestions for how I'd suggest conveying those pieces of information.

> another rule that would be a better introduction

It really is hard to find one that stays minimal. I ran `ls -Sl` on the `rules/` directory to find `no-extra-non-null-assertion` to be the smallest rule file. It's ever so slightly more complicated than optimal (three queries, none simple) but the next few smallest files are even more complicated. How about that one?

https://sourcegraph.com/npm/typescript-eslint/types/-/blob/dist/generated/ast-spec.d.ts?L75

This rule also makes use of the TypeScript type checker:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L23-24

It is noteworthy that it handles **two ASTs**:

1. the ESTree representation used by ESLint
2. the TypeScript AST emitted by the TypeScript compiler.

The `node` value passed as an argument to the rule function is from AST #1, an instance of [`TSESTree.Node`](https://sourcegraph.com/npm/typescript-eslint/types/-/blob/dist/generated/ast-spec.d.ts?L641):

The `originalNode` value is from AST #2, an instance of ([`TSNode`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/typescript-estree/src/ts-estree/ts-nodes.ts?L18:13#tab=references)):

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@HEAD/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L25#tab=def

Why two ASTs instead of one?

> ## Dual ASTs

Author: From @JoshuaKGoldberg:

> - This section starts off a little sparse on details and heavy on the code.
> - The code snippet after `parseAndGenerateServices` is big and intimidating. Can we maybe... introduce it as a thing to skim over in steps, and/or start it off with collapsed sections?

> ## Dueling ASTs

Author: ```suggestion
## Dual ASTs
```

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/typescript-estree/src/convert.ts?L105-110&subtree=true

The `converter` method it invokes is co-recursive with `convertNode`, which is just a giant switch statement on the AST node type that constructs the appropriate ESLint node corresponding to the current TypeScript node. The two corresponding nodes are then added to the TypeScript-to-ESLint node mapping:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/typescript-estree/src/convert.ts?L127-132

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/typescript-estree/src/convert.ts?L770-836&subtree=true

In this fashion, the TypeScript AST is converted by recursively traversing the AST and building the new ESLint one along the way. Both ASTs and the mapping between them are stored so they can be referenced by rules.

> ## Conclusion

Author: ```suggestion
## Next steps
```

Author: Rephrase suggestion: remove most of the text content, and instead say something encouraging about getting involved in

# How TypeScript ESLint Works, a source-level introduction

![TypeScript and ESLint logos](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1646931/169179393-3f1db84a-080a-4887-9f9f-78ab9dc29d4c.png)

> TypeScript ESLint is the de facto tool for linting in TypeScript. It's used by hundreds of thousands of projects and ensures code quality, security, and best practices across the TypeScript world. If you're deploying TypeScript into production, chances are you're using this in your toolchain.

Reviewer: > hundreds of thousands of projects

...prove it? 😁 

I'm hesitant to specify such an impressively high number without evidence. Is there a way to search this on sourcegraph.com? https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+%22%40typescript-eslint/parser%22+file:%22package.json%22&patternType=literal doesn't have a place that says how many results overall there are. Just that there are 500+ results from 273 repositories (YMMV?).

Within just published npm packages, https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin says only 8k+ dependencies. Maybe...

```suggestion
[TypeScript ESLint](https://typescript-eslint.io) is the de facto tool for linting in TypeScript.
It's used by many thousands of projects and ensures code quality, security, and best practices across the TypeScript world.
If you're deploying TypeScript into production, chances are you're using this in your toolchain.
```

Aside: I'm being annoyingly nitpicky and splitting across lines. IMO it's a little nicer for Git diffs, especially in PRs where comments may make per-line suggestions. At least on this review I'm having a hard time in the GH web interface for some of the longer paragraphs 😄.

In this post, we provide a hands-on, technical introduction to how this essential static analysis tool works by tracing through its key code paths. We'll cover the following:

* How linting rules are defined

> * The use of dueling ASTs

Reviewer: Is it safe to assume readers will know what an AST is? IME for public-facing things it's not.

```suggestion
* The use of dueling Abstract Syntax Trees, or ASTs
```

* A neat co-recursive switch pattern for AST traversal

Read on!

## Overview

> TypeScript ESLint is implemented as a collection of packages that build on ESLint. It has a few main modules, the most important of which are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript ESLint is implemented as a collection of packages that build on [ESLint](https://eslint.org). It has a few main modules, the most important of which are:
```

* `eslint-plugin`, which defines the ESLint plugin and the linting rules.
* `parser` and `typescript-estree`, which are responsible for parsing TypeScript source code into an ESLint-compatible form, mapping from TypeScript ASTs to ESLint's AST representation (ESTree) and providing an API to query the AST from the rules.

## How rules work

> The purpose of the linter is to detect a set of patterns in source code that match common anti-patterns. These patterns are described in **rules**. The docs contain a [complete list of these rules](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/).

Reviewer: Clarifying that ESLint is what defines the idea of rules, and has its own set of them that we add to.

```suggestion
The purpose of a linter is to detect a set of patterns in source code that match common anti-patterns.
ESLint, like many linters, defines each anti-pattern to search for in **rules**.
ESLint's docs contain a [list of core ESLint rules](https://eslint.org/docs/rules) available for all JavaScript projects.
TypeScript ESlint provides an additional [list of rules specific to TypeScript projects](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/).
```

> To dive into the code, let's start with the definition of a simple rule. The `no-for-in-array` rule disallows iterating over an array with a for-in loop. Here is an example of this pattern:

Reviewer: Now that we're starting to make sure rules docs pages have useful info on them (https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/4861 -> https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/5064), it's good to direct users to those pages.

```suggestion
To dive into the code, let's start with the definition of a rule.
The [`no-for-in-array` rule](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-for-in-array) disallows iterating over an array with a for-in loop.
Here is an example of this pattern:
```

Also, nit, this rule isn't simple to someone who's never seen an ESLint rule before. 🙂

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/cypress-io/cypress/-/blob/packages/driver/src/cypress/proxy-logging.ts?L13

This anti-pattern is quite widespread, because it feels intuitive to use the for-in syntax to traverse an array. Doing so, however, may visit the array elements out-of-order. Instead `array.forEach` is recommended.

Let's dive into the definition of this rule in source. It is short enough to include here in its entirety:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts

The rule definition contains metadata at the top and the actual logic of the rule below. Let's zoom in on that logic:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L22-41

> There may be some unfamiliar syntax for some here. This code might look like it's defining a function called `ForInStatement` within an object declaration, but it's really just a terse variant of declaring a function value for an object key, like this:

Reviewer: Great explanation of inline object literal syntax. I'm going to steal this phrasing in my next overview of it. Thanks! 😄 

> just

Nit: it's good to not use words like "just" or "simply" in docs when referring to something's complexity. It implies something is easy. Learners easily get discouraged when they have a hard time understanding something the page is telling them shouldn't be difficult. Maybe...

```suggestion
There may be some unfamiliar syntax for some here.
This code might look like it's defining a function called `ForInStatement` within an object declaration, but it's actually a terse variant of declaring a function value for an object key, like this:
```

```typescript
{
    ForInStatement: (node): void => { ... }
}
```

> This key will be used to match this rule with the name of an AST node type in the ESLint AST, so that the node argument will always have the type that the rule targets:
> 
> https://sourcegraph.com/npm/typescript-eslint/types@540cca215af38ab1a49b6cde8bcb492f4b6e53c5/-/blob/dist/generated/ast-spec.d.ts?L75

Reviewer: Continuing the AST introduction comment: I think it'd make sense to introduce ESQuery and https://typescript-eslint.io/play when the first rule queries get introduced. Otherwise it's a big ~insurmountable leap to understanding how these queries work. Right now that's this paragraph. 

Vaguely...

```suggestion
The keys ESLint rule objects act as queries on the AST.
They use the [ESQuery](https://github.com/estools/esquery) library, which allows using syntax similar to CSS selectors for querying types of nodes.
```

Plus one of..

...if this stays with `ForInStatement`:

```md
An object key like `ForInStatement`, for example, queries for any node whose type is `"ForInStatement"`: i.e. any for-in statement.
```

...or, if this uses `no-extra-non-null-assertion`:

```md
An object key like `'TSNonNullExpression > TSNonNullExpression'`, for example, queries for any `TSNonNullExpression` node (a `!` after a name) inside of another `TSNonNullExpression` node.
```

The ast-spec.d.ts file seems like a confusing entry point. Was there a reason you wanted to bring it up? If so, can that reason be explicitly stated in this blog post?

## Type-checking

> One distinction between TypeScript ESLint and vanilla ESLint is that we have access to the TypeScript type checker and can therefore define rules that make use of type information.

Reviewer: Nit: it's a bit understated here, but the difference in power between type checked rules and vanilla rules can be _massive!_ Also splitting up the sentence, if you don't mind:

```suggestion
One powerful distinction between TypeScript ESLint and vanilla ESLint is that we have access to the TypeScript type checker.
Rules that make use of type checking are able to make informed decisions on nodes based on their type information.
```

The `for-in-array` rule uses the type checker to determine if we are dealing with an array type:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L23-24

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L32-35

## Dual ASTs

> In addition to invoking the type checker, the `for-in-array` rule also makes use of **two ASTs**:

Reviewer: Nit: both statements are accurate, but this one is a bit more precise:

```suggestion
In order to invoke the type checker, the `for-in-array` rule makes use of **two ASTs**:
```

1. the ESTree representation used by ESLint
2. the TypeScript AST emitted by the TypeScript compiler.

The `node` value passed as an argument to the rule function is from AST #1, an instance of [`TSESTree.Node`](https://sourcegraph.com/npm/typescript-eslint/types/-/blob/dist/generated/ast-spec.d.ts?L641):

The `originalNode` value is from AST #2, an instance of ([`TSNode`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/typescript-estree/src/ts-estree/ts-nodes.ts?L18:13#tab=references)):

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@HEAD/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L25#tab=def

Why two ASTs instead of one? Because each provides a distinct set of useful functionality.

1. The `TSESTree` representation is used by ESLint internally and enables the plugin to reuse much of the code and linting framework provided by ESLint.

> 2. The `TSNode` representation is emitted by the TypeScript compiler and contains type information.

Reviewer: I want to say the `TSNode`s don't have type information themselves? I might be wrong on how the internal representation is set up. But, the external API makes it seem that way, so that's how I'd suggest phrasing it.

```suggestion
2. The `TSNode` representation is emitted by the TypeScript compiler and is what the type checker's APIs expect as inputs
```

Reviewer 2: you are correct, ts-ast, has no type data, we have to call checker service to get them, 

(to be clear after first call to checker private cache like structure is added to ts-ast)

This rule checks if the type of the variable in the expression is an array type using the `TSNode` representation:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@HEAD/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L32-35#tab=def

And then uses the `TSESTree` node to report back results to ESLint:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@HEAD/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L36-39

> In order to use both ASTs, the plugin must create both and construct a mapping between the two. The way it does so is by using a co-recursive switch pattern. Let's examine how it does this.

Reviewer: I was a little lost seeing all this info without a sub-heading. Can we add one here?

```suggestion
### Creating the Dual ASTs

In order to use both ASTs, the plugin must create both and construct a mapping between the two. The way it does so is by using a co-recursive switch pattern. Let's examine how it does this.
```

> In order to use both ASTs, the plugin must create both and construct a mapping between the two. The way it does so is by using a co-recursive switch pattern. Let's examine how it does this.

Reviewer: > co-recursive switch pattern

I do not know what that phrase means, and I have repeatedly written this kind of code before 😂. Can this post define the term, or give a phrase like _"meaning: ..."_?

Vaguely:

 ```suggestion
In order to use both ASTs, the plugin must create both and construct a mapping between the two. 
The way it does so is by using a "co-recursive switch pattern": meaning it creates a recursive function containing a switch statement whose cases may each call that recursive function again.
Let's examine how that looks.
```

(I'm not 100% on that phrasing, but it's the best I've got right now...)

> The key function is `parseAndGenerateServices`:

Reviewer: A general suggestion for each of the sentences starting with this one through the rest of this section: it's hard to understand what the code does in isolation without more explanation. I would assume that average reader reading the code snippet for `parseAndGenerateServices` would space out and skip to the next section before fully understanding it. If you're going to bring up code, can I suggest at least giving an overview before or after?

For example:

```suggestion
The key function that starts the parsing is `parseAndGenerateServices`.
It takes in a code string with parsing options, and returns the equivalent AST:
```

> # How TypeScript ESLint Works, a source-level introduction

Reviewer: One more UI bug report from me 🙂: the _Run all blocks_ button does nothing when pressed. No visual change, no console logs, nothing. 

![Screenshot of the Run all blocks button](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3335181/174562133-6f2a903b-d0a2-46b0-bfc2-b75405541caa.png)

![TypeScript and ESLint logos](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1646931/169179393-3f1db84a-080a-4887-9f9f-78ab9dc29d4c.png)

[TypeScript ESLint](https://typescript-eslint.io) is the de facto tool for linting in TypeScript.
It's used by many thousands of projects and ensures code quality, security, and best practices across the TypeScript world.
If you're deploying TypeScript into production, chances are you're using this in your toolchain.

In this post, we provide a hands-on, technical introduction to how this essential static analysis tool works by tracing through its key code paths.
We'll cover the following:

- How ESLint rules are defined
- How ESLint rules use ASTs to analyze code files
- Switching between ESLint's and TypeScript's AST formats
- Calling TypeScript's type checking APIs to analyze code

> Not familiar with ASTs yet?
> No worries!

> > Read [TypeScript ESLint's Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) docs page](https://typescript-eslint.io/docs/development/architecture/asts) to learn how programs represent and reason about source code.

Reviewer: Nit: so as to not conflict with the _Read on!_ immediately following.

```suggestion
> See [TypeScript ESLint's Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) docs page](https://typescript-eslint.io/docs/development/architecture/asts) to learn how programs represent and reason about source code.
```

Read on!

## Overview

TypeScript ESLint is implemented as a collection of packages that build on [ESLint](https://eslint.org).
The packages we'll be going over in this walkthrough are:

- [`eslint-plugin`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin), which defines the ESLint plugin and the linting rules.

> - [`parser`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/parser) and [`typescript-estree`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/typescript-estree), which are responsible for parsing TypeScript source code into an ESLint-compatible form, mapping from TypeScript ASTs to ESLint's AST representation (ESTree) and providing an API to query the AST from the rules.

Reviewer: Nit: Serial comma!

```suggestion
- [`parser`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/parser) and [`typescript-estree`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/typescript-estree), which are responsible for parsing TypeScript source code into an ESLint-compatible form, mapping from TypeScript ASTs to ESLint's AST representation (ESTree), and providing an API to query the AST from the rules.
```

### ESLint Rules

The purpose of a linter is to detect a set of patterns in source code that match common anti-patterns.

> ESLint, like many linters, defines each anti-pattern to search for in **rules**.

Reviewer: Nit: grammar oddity. Since each anti-pattern is its own rule, it's slightly off to say "each" anti-pattern has "rules" (plural).

```suggestion
ESLint, like many linters, defines anti-patterns to search for in **rules**.
Each individual rule defines the logic for detecting and reporting on one common class of anti-pattern.
```

ESLint's docs contain a [list of core ESLint rules](https://eslint.org/docs/rules) available for all JavaScript projects.
TypeScript ESlint provides an additional [list of rules specific to TypeScript projects](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules).

For example, the `no-extra-non-null-assertion` rule catches unnecessary repeated `!`s in TypeScript code.
Here is an example of that anti-pattern:

```ts
const scream =
  Math.random() > 0.5 ? "What's your favorite scary movie?" : undefined;

> // Multiple !!s are used, but only one is needed

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
// Multiple !s are used, but only one is needed
```

console.log(scream!!!.toUpperCase());
```

Let's dig into how we can create a rule to ban those unnecessary repeated `!`s.

## Declaring a Rule

> ESLint rules are declared as objects that have two properties:

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
ESLint rules are declared as objects that each have two properties:
```

- `meta`: Rule metadata such as configuration options and messages it may report

> - `create`: A function that creates the functions to be called by ESLint at runtime

Reviewer: Nit: sacrificing slight technical accuracy (function vs. method) to avoid saying "function" quite so much.

```suggestion
- `create`: A function that returns an object containing methods to be called by ESLint at runtime
```

`RuleCreator` adds a documentation URL to rules under `meta.docs.url` based on their name.
TypeScript ESLint rules are each documented on a page under https://typescript-eslint.io/rules, such as https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-extra-non-null-assertion.

### Rule Metadata Properties

Two particularly useful rule metadata properties are specified in many TypeScript ESLint rules:

- `fixable`: If the rule includes an auto-fixer on any of its messages, either `"code"` or `"whitespace"`
- `messages`: An object keying ID strings to full messages that may be reported by the rule

`no-extra-non-null-assertion`'s `meta` indicates it has an auto-fixer for code issues and that it may report _`Forbidden extra non-null assertion`_ if it detects an issue.

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-extra-non-null-assertion.ts?L6-17

### Rule Creator Functions

A rule's `create` function returns an object whose keys are AST queries and whose values are functions that will be run whenever a node matching the corresponding query is found.

> The AST query keys use the [ESQuery](https://github.com/estools/esquery) library, which allows using syntax similar to CSS selectors for querying types of nodes.

Reviewer: Nit: more precision...

```suggestion
The AST query keys are in the [ESQuery](https://github.com/estools/esquery) library format, which allows using syntax similar to CSS selectors for querying types of nodes.
```

`no-extra-non-null-assertion` creates three node queries in its returned object:

1. Any `!` non-null assertion within another `!` non-null assertion: e.g. `scream!!.length`
2. Any `!` non-null assertion just before an `?.` optional chained property: e.g. `scream!?.length`
3. Any `!` non-null assertion just before an `?.` optional chained call: e.g. `scream!?.()`

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-extra-non-null-assertion.ts?L19-39

Note that any AST node names prefixed with `TS`, including `TSNonNullExpression`, are TypeScript-specific nodes.
These are available to ESLint rules when using [`@typescript-eslint/parser`](http://npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/parser) instead of ESLint's built-in parser.

> The `@typescript-eslint/utils` package exports those types under the `TSESTree` namespace.
> 
> The corresponding TypeScript types for all the possible node types are stored in a [`@typescript-eslint/types`](https://npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/types) package.

Reviewer: Correction: the types package includes types for all AST nodes as parsed by the parser -- not just TS-specific ones. Existing node types are different now, such as allowing new types of nodes (the TS ones) as children.

```suggestion

For convenience, the `@typescript-eslint/utils` package exports types representing AST nodes as parsed by `@typescript-eslint/parser` under the `TSESTree` namespace.
The corresponding TypeScript types for all the possible node types are stored in a [`@typescript-eslint/types`](https://npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/types) package.
```

All nodes extend from a `BaseNode` interface:

https://sourcegraph.com/npm/typescript-eslint/types@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/dist/generated/ast-spec.d.ts?L236-L244

#### Reporting on Code Issues

Rule creator functions receive an ESLint "Context" object as a `context` parameter.
That `context` object is most commonly used for its `report` method, which is what indicates a code issue has been found.

`no-extra-non-null-assertion` calls `context.report` immediately for any node that matches one of its three node queries.
It provides three properties:

- `node`: The node itself, indicating the text range of the report (where to put unhappy squiggly underlines in an IDE)
- `messageId`: Which string ID of message to report, from `meta`
- `fix`: A function that generate instructions for how to auto-fix the code issue

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-extra-non-null-assertion.ts?L20-30

> ## Type-checking

Reviewer: Style nit: aligning with other headings...

```suggestion
## Type Checking
```

One powerful distinction between TypeScript ESLint and vanilla ESLint is that TypeScript ESLint rules have access to the TypeScript type checker.
Rules that use type checking are able to make informed decisions on nodes based on their type information.

TypeScript ESLint's `no-for-in-array` rule uses type information to determine if a `for-in` loop is iterating over an array rather than an object or string.

> Knowing the type of a value is only possible in JavaScript or TypeScript code if you have access to a type checker.

Reviewer: Nit: moving this lower down to where it doesn't break narrative flow...

```suggestion
```

Here is an example of this pattern:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/cypress-io/cypress@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/driver/src/cypress/proxy-logging.ts?L13

This anti-pattern is quite widespread, because it feels intuitive to use the for-in syntax to traverse an array.
Doing so, however, may visit the array elements out-of-order.
Instead `for-of` loops or `array.forEach` are recommended.

> ESLint rules that use type information are set up similarly to other ESLint rules.

Reviewer: Nit: ...from above:

```suggestion
Knowing the type of a value is only possible in JavaScript or TypeScript code if you have access to a type checker.
ESLint rules that use a type checker are set up similarly to other ESLint rules.
```

1. `getTypeAtLocation`: Given a _TypeScript_ node, its TypeScript type (`ts.Type`)
2. `getBaseConstraintOfType`: If the TypeScript type is a generic from a type parameter, any constraint that limits what it's allowed to be (e.g. a `string[]` from `function myFunction<T extends string[]>`)

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3cd54b7c12a07c113160ef694636721ea66b4f69@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L27:30#tab=def

The rule then checks if the type is in some way an array, union of arrays, or a string:

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@3cd54b7c12a07c113160ef694636721ea66b4f69@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L33-L34#tab=def

If the type was one of those disallowed types, then the rule reports an issue with the original _TSESTree_ node.

https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint@HEAD@3eab889022c9d1617f275017d6951f663ea57f24/-/blob/packages/eslint-plugin/src/rules/no-for-in-array.ts?L36-39

> ## Next steps

Reviewer: Style nit: aligning with other headings...

```suggestion
## Next Steps
```
